content/1-open-source.md, before:

---
title: Open Source
chapter: Chapter 1
colors:
  base: '#041B6A'
  accentOne: '#F77C97'
  accentTwo: '#FE6A76'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - history-thumb.jpg
  - history-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - history-thumb-back.png
  - history-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - history-thumb-mid.png
  - history-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - history-thumb-front.png
  - history-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - history.jpg
  - history@2x.jpg
---

# Open Source

## What is Open Source?

It is a fascinating concept that has revolutionized the way software is developed and distributed, and also been adapted to other areas like design, science, education and governance.

It is typically identified with software whose source code – the underlying instructions that make the program work – is freely available for anyone to view, modify, and distribute. This approach stands in stark contrast to proprietary or "closed source" software, where the source code is kept secret and tightly controlled by its owners. Visit [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source) if you'd like to dig deeper into the history of open source. 

But there's more to it than just visible code. It's a philosophy that extends far beyond the realm of software development. The open source movement embodies principles of collaboration, transparency, and community-driven innovation. It's about fostering a culture where knowledge is shared freely and improvements are made collectively.

Imagine a world where the blueprint for every piece of technology is available for all to see and improve upon. That's the essence of open source. It's like a global potluck dinner where everyone brings a dish to share, and together, we create a feast that's far more diverse and delicious than any one person could have made alone.

While we'll primarily focus on open source software in this guide, it's important to note that its principles extend to other areas, including open design. As we explore this topic, you'll see how these concepts apply to your work as a designer (especially [Chapter 2](/2-the-designers-role)).

## Key Principles

Open source projects often adhere to the following principles, though it's important to note that individual projects may have their own unique guidelines.

### Transparency

Transparency is at the heart of open source. Everything about the software – from its code to the development process and decision-making – is open for anyone to examine. This builds trust and allows for a level of scrutiny that often leads to more secure and reliable software.

### Collaboration

Projects welcome contributions from anyone, regardless of their background or affiliation. Whether you're a seasoned professional or a curious newcomer, your ideas and efforts are valued.

### Iterative progress

With the source code being accessible to all, new ideas can be quickly implemented and tested by the community. This leads to faster progress and more robust solutions. Also see [Chapter 4: Collaborative Workflows](/4-collaborative-workflows).

### Quality

Contributions are typically judged on their quality, not on who submitted them. This ensures that the best ideas rise to the top, regardless of their origin.

### Community

A strong sense of community often develops around these projects. Contributors from around the world come together, united by a shared goal of improving the project they're working on.

### Freedom
Open source typically provides users with the freedom to use, study, modify, and distribute the software or resource.

It's worth mentioning that projects are typically governed by specific licenses (like [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/) and [OSI approved licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses)) that define how the work can be used and distributed. Understanding these licenses is an important aspect of contributing.

## Benefits of Contributing

For designers, dipping your toes into the open source world can be an incredibly rewarding experience. It's not just about giving back to the community – although that's certainly a big part. It can also significantly boost your career and personal growth in numerous ways.

### Develop skills and build your portfolio

Project contributions are a fantastic way to build your portfolio. You're creating tangible examples of your work that everyone, including potential employers and clients, can see. It's like having a living, breathing resume that showcases not just what you can do, but what you've actually done in real-world scenarios. More on this in [Chapter 9: Building a Personal Brand](/9-personal-brand).

### Collaborate and network

As you work on projects, you'll connect with other professionals in your field from all around the world. This can lead to job opportunities, collaborations, or simply friendships with like-minded individuals who share your passions.

### Impact and recognition

Your contributions can positively affect thousands or even millions of users worldwide, and that kind of influence can earn you respect from your peers in the open source community and beyond.

### Personal satisfaction

Lastly, many people find great personal satisfaction in contributing. There's something special about knowing that your work is benefiting the wider community, often in ways you might never have imagined. And it is a great way to spend time on topics you care about.

## Common Misconceptions

Despite its growing popularity, there are still some common misconceptions that are worth addressing.

### "It's only for developers"

While it's true that coding plays a significant role in many open source projects, there's a growing need for a variety of skills. Designers, writers, testers, and many other non-coding roles are crucial to the broader success of projects. In fact, good design is becoming increasingly recognized as a key factor for adoption and usability. Read more about this in [chapter 2](/2-the-designers-role).

### "It's always free"

While often free to use, "open source" doesn't necessarily mean "no cost." Some open source projects have commercial versions or offer paid support. The "free" in free software refers more to freedom than to price – the freedom to use, study, modify, and distribute the software.

### "It's low quality"

This couldn't be further from the truth. Many open source projects are of extremely high quality, benefiting from the scrutiny and contributions of a global community of talented individuals. In many cases, open source software is more reliable and secure than its proprietary counterparts.

### "It's too complicated"

While there can be a learning curve, many projects are actively working to make contribution easier for newcomers. There are often mentorship programs, "good first issue" tags, and supportive communities ready to help new contributors get started. However, it's important to acknowledge that the complexity can vary between projects and it may take time to get comfortable with the processes. More on this in [Chapter 3: Getting Started](/3-getting-started).

### "You'll be the only designer in the project"

While some projects may have limited design resources, many open source projects have active design teams and communities. Other projects would be happy to have more design contributors, and you can help make that happen if you'd like.

## The Impact of Open Source

The impact of open source on the technology landscape cannot be overstated. It has fundamentally changed how software is developed, distributed, and used across the globe. It has also a profound impact across various sectors:

- **Technology:** [Linux](https://www.linux.org/), an open source operating system, powers much of the internet's infrastructure. The [Android](https://www.android.com/) mobile operating system, based on open source, runs on billions of devices worldwide. This website is based on [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com/), an open-source Javascript framework.
- **Design:** Open source design tools and resources, such as [Penpot](https://penpot.app/), the [Inter](https://rsms.me/inter/) typeface, [Open Peeps](https://www.openpeeps.com/), the [Bitcoin Design Guide](https://bitcoin.design/guide/), [Health Icons](https://healthicons.org/) or [Material Design](https://m3.material.io/), have democratized access to professional-grade design assets and guidelines. More on this in [Chapter 6: Tools & Resources](/6-design-tools).
- **[Education](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_education):** Open educational resources (like this guide you are reading right now) and platforms have made learning more accessible globally.
- **[Science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_science):** Open source principles in scientific research have led to more collaborative and transparent scientific processes.
- **[Governance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_government):** Open data initiatives in government have increased transparency and citizen engagement.

As a designer, your contributions can significantly enhance user experiences, making powerful tools and resources more accessible and user-friendly for people around the world.

## Conclusion

The principles of open source – transparency, collaboration, and community-driven innovation – align beautifully with the goals of good design: creating products that are accessible, usable, and beneficial to users.

The skills and experiences you gain from contributing can significantly enhance your professional growth and open up new opportunities in your design career. Whether you're looking to expand your portfolio, learn new skills, network with fellow professionals, or simply give back to the community, open source offers a wealth of opportunities.

Remember, every expert was once a beginner. The open source community is generally welcoming and supportive of newcomers. So don't be afraid to take that first step. Your journey into open design is just beginning, and it promises to be an exciting and rewarding adventure.

Now let's venture deeper into the world of open source, you'll discover [the crucial role that designers play](/2-the-designers-role) in these collaborative ecosystems.

Commit message:

Revision of chapter 2 based on reading session
Trying to address some of the feedback we came up with. I have to come back to this one and iterate a little further.

I stayed away from the success stories, as I think this is a separate and larger mini-project to tackle. It requires research and digging up those great examples and goes beyond copy revision.

This also introduces a new type of link - a chapter link. It has a distinct look from external links, so readers can easily identify internal cross-references. Curious to hear what others think of it.

content/1-open-source.md, after:

---
title: Open Source
chapter: Chapter 1
colors:
  base: '#041B6A'
  accentOne: '#F77C97'
  accentTwo: '#FE6A76'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - history-thumb.jpg
  - history-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - history-thumb-back.png
  - history-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - history-thumb-mid.png
  - history-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - history-thumb-front.png
  - history-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - history.jpg
  - history@2x.jpg
---

# Open Source

## What is Open Source?

It is a fascinating concept that has revolutionized the way software is developed and distributed, and also been adapted to other areas like design, science, education and governance.

It is typically identified with software whose source code – the underlying instructions that make the program work – is freely available for anyone to view, modify, and distribute. This approach stands in stark contrast to proprietary or "closed source" software, where the source code is kept secret and tightly controlled by its owners. Visit [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source) if you'd like to dig deeper into the history of open source. 

But there's more to it than just visible code. It's a philosophy that extends far beyond the realm of software development. The open source movement embodies principles of collaboration, transparency, and community-driven innovation. It's about fostering a culture where knowledge is shared freely and improvements are made collectively.

Imagine a world where the blueprint for every piece of technology is available for all to see and improve upon. That's the essence of open source. It's like a global potluck dinner where everyone brings a dish to share, and together, we create a feast that's far more diverse and delicious than any one person could have made alone.

While we'll primarily focus on open source software in this guide, it's important to note that its principles extend to other areas, including open design. As we explore this topic, you'll see how these concepts apply to your work as a designer [C2](/2-the-designers-role){:class='chapter-link'}.

## Key Principles

Open source projects often adhere to the following principles, though it's important to note that individual projects may have their own unique guidelines.

### Transparency

Transparency is at the heart of open source. Everything about the software – from its code to the development process and decision-making – is open for anyone to examine. This builds trust and allows for a level of scrutiny that often leads to more secure and reliable software.

### Collaboration

Projects welcome contributions from anyone, regardless of their background or affiliation. Whether you're a seasoned professional or a curious newcomer, your ideas and efforts are valued.

### Iterative progress

With the source code being accessible to all, new ideas can be quickly implemented and tested by the community. This leads to faster progress and more robust solutions [C4: Collaborative Workflows](/4-collaborative-workflows){:class='chapter-link'}.

### Quality

Contributions are typically judged on their quality, not on who submitted them. This ensures that the best ideas rise to the top, regardless of their origin.

### Community

A strong sense of community often develops around these projects. Contributors from around the world come together, united by a shared goal of improving the project they're working on.

### Freedom
Open source typically provides users with the freedom to use, study, modify, and distribute the software or resource.

It's worth mentioning that projects are typically governed by specific licenses (like [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/) and [OSI approved licenses](https://opensource.org/licenses)) that define how the work can be used and distributed. Understanding these licenses is an important aspect of contributing.

## Benefits of Contributing

For designers, dipping your toes into the open source world can be an incredibly rewarding experience. It's not just about giving back to the community – although that's certainly a big part. It can also significantly boost your career and personal growth in numerous ways.

### Develop skills and build your portfolio

Project contributions are a fantastic way to build your portfolio. You're creating tangible examples of your work that everyone, including potential employers and clients, can see. It's like having a living, breathing resume that showcases not just what you can do, but what you've actually done in real-world scenarios [C9: Building a Personal Brand](/9-personal-brand){:class='chapter-link'}.

### Collaborate and network

As you work on projects, you'll connect with other professionals in your field from all around the world. This can lead to job opportunities, collaborations, or simply friendships with like-minded individuals who share your passions.

### Impact and recognition

Your contributions can positively affect thousands or even millions of users worldwide, and that kind of influence can earn you respect from your peers in the open source community and beyond.

### Personal satisfaction

Lastly, many people find great personal satisfaction in contributing. There's something special about knowing that your work is benefiting the wider community, often in ways you might never have imagined. And it is a great way to spend time on topics you care about.

## Common Misconceptions

Despite its growing popularity, there are still some common misconceptions that are worth addressing.

### "It's only for developers"

While it's true that coding plays a significant role in many open source projects, there's a growing need for a variety of skills. Designers, writers, testers, and many other non-coding roles are crucial to the broader success of projects. In fact, good design is becoming increasingly recognized as a key factor for adoption and usability [C2](/2-the-designers-role){:class='chapter-link'}.

### "It's always free"

While often free to use, "open source" doesn't necessarily mean "no cost." Some open source projects have commercial versions or offer paid support. The "free" in free software refers more to freedom than to price – the freedom to use, study, modify, and distribute the software.

### "It's low quality"

This couldn't be further from the truth. Many open source projects are of extremely high quality, benefiting from the scrutiny and contributions of a global community of talented individuals. In many cases, open source software is more reliable and secure than its proprietary counterparts.

### "It's too complicated"

While there can be a learning curve, many projects are actively working to make contribution easier for newcomers. There are often mentorship programs, "good first issue" tags, and supportive communities ready to help new contributors get started. However, it's important to acknowledge that the complexity can vary between projects and it may take time to get comfortable with the processes [C3: Getting Started](/3-getting-started){:class='chapter-link'}.

### "You'll be the only designer in the project"

While some projects may have limited design resources, many open source projects have active design teams and communities. Other projects would be happy to have more design contributors, and you can help make that happen if you'd like.

## The Impact of Open Source

The impact of open source on the technology landscape cannot be overstated. It has fundamentally changed how software is developed, distributed, and used across the globe. It has also a profound impact across various sectors:

- **Technology:** [Linux](https://www.linux.org/), an open source operating system, powers much of the internet's infrastructure. The [Android](https://www.android.com/) mobile operating system, based on open source, runs on billions of devices worldwide. This website is based on [Nuxt](https://nuxt.com/), an open-source Javascript framework.
- **Design:** Open source design tools and resources, such as [Penpot](https://penpot.app/), the [Inter](https://rsms.me/inter/) typeface, [Open Peeps](https://www.openpeeps.com/), the [Bitcoin Design Guide](https://bitcoin.design/guide/), [Health Icons](https://healthicons.org/) or [Material Design](https://m3.material.io/), have democratized access to professional-grade design assets and guidelines. More on this in [Chapter 6: Tools & Resources](/6-design-tools).
- **[Education](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_education):** Open educational resources (like this guide you are reading right now) and platforms have made learning more accessible globally.
- **[Science](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_science):** Open source principles in scientific research have led to more collaborative and transparent scientific processes.
- **[Governance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_government):** Open data initiatives in government have increased transparency and citizen engagement.

As a designer, your contributions can significantly enhance user experiences, making powerful tools and resources more accessible and user-friendly for people around the world.

## Conclusion

The principles of open source – transparency, collaboration, and community-driven innovation – align beautifully with the goals of good design: creating products that are accessible, usable, and beneficial to users.

The skills and experiences you gain from contributing can significantly enhance your professional growth and open up new opportunities in your design career. Whether you're looking to expand your portfolio, learn new skills, network with fellow professionals, or simply give back to the community, open source offers a wealth of opportunities.

Remember, every expert was once a beginner. The open source community is generally welcoming and supportive of newcomers. So don't be afraid to take that first step. Your journey into open design is just beginning, and it promises to be an exciting and rewarding adventure.

Now let's venture deeper into the world of open source, in [Chapter 2](/2-the-designers-role){:class='chapter-link'} you'll discover the crucial role that designers play in these collaborative ecosystems.
