content/13-about.md, before:

---
title: Contributions
chapter: Acknowledgements &
description: Meet the team behind this open source design curriculum. Learn about our mission, supporters, and how you can contribute to improving design education.
colors:
  base: '#5B81FE'
  accentOne: '#F02C1F'
  accentTwo: '#5A9D8C'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - about-thumb.jpg
  - about-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - about-thumb-back.png
  - about-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - about-thumb-mid.png
  - about-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - about-thumb-front.png
  - about-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - about.jpg
  - about@2x.jpg
preview: about-preview.jpg
---

# Contributions

## Our Supporters

This curriculum wouldn't be possible without the support of numerous individuals and organizations who share our vision for a more design-centric open source ecosystem. We'd like to extend our heartfelt thanks to:

- Placeholder for specific supporters (TODO)

Your belief in our mission and your generous support have been instrumental in bringing this curriculum to life.

## The Open Source Community

We owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to the broader open source community. Your tireless efforts, innovation, and commitment to sharing knowledge have created a rich ecosystem that benefits millions of people worldwide. This curriculum stands on the shoulders of giants – the countless contributors who have shaped the open source landscape over the years.

Special thanks to:

- The maintainers and contributors of major open source projects who have paved the way for better design integration
- Open source designers who have shared their experiences and best practices
- Organizations that promote open source design, such as [Open Source Design](http://opensourcedesign.net) and the [Bitcoin Design Community](http://bitcoin.design)
- Educational institutions and platforms that support open source education

Your work inspires us and provides the foundation upon which we build.

## Invitation to Contribute

This curriculum, like the open source projects it teaches about, is a collaborative effort. We invite you to contribute to its ongoing development and improvement. Whether you're an experienced open source designer or just starting your journey, your input is valuable.

Here's how you can contribute:

1. **Content Improvements**: Help us refine existing chapters, add new insights, or suggest additional topics.
2. **Case Studies**: Share your experiences contributing to open source projects as a designer.
3. **Visual Assets**: Create illustrations, diagrams, or other visual aids to enhance the learning experience.
4. **Translations**: Help make this curriculum accessible to non-English speakers.
5. **Feedback**: Share your thoughts on the curriculum's effectiveness and areas for improvement.

To contribute, please visit our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/GBKS/opendesign.guide). There, you'll find detailed guidelines on how to submit your contributions.

Remember, every contribution, no matter how small, helps improve this resource for designers worldwide. Together, we can create a more inclusive, design-friendly open source ecosystem.

Thank you for being part of this journey. Let's shape the future of open source design together!

Commit message:

About and readme update and tracking
- Replaces some placeholder text on the about page with slightly better copy
- Replaces the default README file with slightly better copy
- Adds Umami tracking

Just some minor basic tweaks that should have been done a long time ago.

content/13-about.md, after:

---
title: Contributions
chapter: Acknowledgements &
description: Meet the team behind this open source design curriculum. Learn about our mission, supporters, and how you can contribute to improving design education.
colors:
  base: '#5B81FE'
  accentOne: '#F02C1F'
  accentTwo: '#5A9D8C'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - about-thumb.jpg
  - about-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - about-thumb-back.png
  - about-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - about-thumb-mid.png
  - about-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - about-thumb-front.png
  - about-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - about.jpg
  - about@2x.jpg
preview: about-preview.jpg
---

# Contributions

## Origin story

This curriculum emerged from a recognized need in the open source community: designers often struggle to understand how open source works and how to contribute meaningfully, while projects frequently face challenges in working effectively with designers and design processes. And there wasn't any good learning material.

The Open Design Guide was launched by the [Bitcoin Design Community](http://bitcoin.design), which also hosted a series of reading club calls to review and revise the initial AI-generated content.

While this project began as a grassroots effort rather than through formal organizational support, it reflects the collaborative spirit of open source – growing from community-identified needs and volunteer expertise.

## The Open Source Community

We owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to the broader open source community. Your tireless efforts, innovation, and commitment to sharing knowledge have created a rich ecosystem that benefits millions of people worldwide. This curriculum stands on the shoulders of giants – the countless contributors who have shaped the open source landscape over the years.

Special thanks to:

- The maintainers and contributors of major open source projects who have paved the way for better design integration
- Open source designers who have shared their experiences and best practices
- Organizations that promote open source design, such as [Open Source Design](http://opensourcedesign.net) and the [Bitcoin Design Community](http://bitcoin.design)
- Educational institutions and platforms that support open source education

Your work inspires us and provides the foundation upon which we build.

## Invitation to Contribute

This curriculum, like the open source projects it teaches about, is a collaborative effort. We invite you to contribute to its ongoing development and improvement. Whether you're an experienced open source designer or just starting your journey, your input is valuable.

Here's how you can contribute:

1. **Content Improvements**: Help us refine existing chapters, add new insights, or suggest additional topics.
2. **Case Studies**: Share your experiences contributing to open source projects as a designer.
3. **Visual Assets**: Create illustrations, diagrams, or other visual aids to enhance the learning experience.
4. **Translations**: Help make this curriculum accessible to non-English speakers.
5. **Feedback**: Share your thoughts on the curriculum's effectiveness and areas for improvement.

To contribute, please visit our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/GBKS/opendesign.guide). There, you'll find detailed guidelines on how to submit your contributions.

Remember, every contribution, no matter how small, helps improve this resource for designers worldwide. Together, we can create a more inclusive, design-friendly open source ecosystem.

Thank you for being part of this journey. Let's shape the future of open source design together!
