content/2-the-designers-role.md, before:

---
title: Understanding the designer's role
chapter: Chapter 2
colors:
  base: '#FDC3AF'
  accentOne: '#F2734F'
  accentTwo: '#2A5EA7'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - designers-role-thumb.jpg
  - designers-role-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - designers-role-thumb-back.png
  - designers-role-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - designers-role-thumb-mid.png
  - designers-role-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - designers-role-thumb-front.png
  - designers-role-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - designers-role.jpg
  - designers-role@2x.jpg
---

# Understanding the Designer's Role

## The Evolving Role of Design

In the early days of open source [C1](/1-open-source){:class='chapter-link'}, the focus was primarily on functionality. Developers were more concerned with creating powerful software that could perform complex tasks, often with little emphasis on user-friendliness. The result was software that, while impressive in its capabilities, could be challenging for the average user to navigate and use effectively.

Today, design plays a crucial role in the success and adoption of open source projects. The community has recognized that even the most powerful software is of limited use if people find it difficult or frustrating to use. There is now a growing emphasis on creating intuitive, visually appealing interfaces and smooth user experiences.

This shift has opened up exciting opportunities for designers to make significant contributions. Your skills are now more valuable than ever, and you have the power to shape how millions of people interact with technology.

## Types of Design Contributions

As a designer, you might be wondering exactly how you can contribute to open source projects. The good news is that there are many ways to get involved, each utilizing different aspects of your design expertise.

**User Research** [C8](/8-improving-ux/#conducting-user-research){:class='chapter-link'} is essential for understanding the role a project plays in users lives. Listening to the community and speaking with users about their needs, behaviors, and pain points helps inform design decisions and ensure that the software meets real user needs. A unique aspect of open-source user research is that you are part of the community and in direct contact with users and contributors all the time.

**User Interface (UI) Design** is perhaps the most visible form of contribution. This involves creating visually appealing and intuitive interfaces for applications. Your work here can transform a powerful but intimidating piece of software into something that users find inviting and easy to use.

Closely related to UI Design is **User Experience (UX) Design**. While UI focuses on the look of the interface, UX is concerned with the overall user journey. As a UX designer, you'll consider new, regular, and experienced users across their many activities, and make sure that every interaction is consistent, smooth and intuitive.

If you have a knack for creating eye-catching visuals, you might focus on **Graphic Design**. This could involve developing logos and websites that capture the essence of a project, designing icons that clearly communicate their function, or creating other visual assets that enhance the software's appeal. Swag and conference materials are also often in high demand.

For those who enjoy organizing information, **Information Architecture** offers a vital role. This involves structuring the content within an application in a way that makes sense to users, helping them find what they need quickly and easily.

**Interaction Design** is another crucial area. Here, you'll focus on designing how users interact with the software's features, ensuring that every button press, swipe, or click feels natural and satisfying.

In larger projects, you might contribute to **Design Systems**. This involves creating and maintaining consistent design languages that can be applied across all aspects of a project, ensuring a cohesive look and feel.

**Accessibility Design** is important for letting users adjust software to their needs and wants. Your role is to ensure that the technology is usable by people with various abilities and across many different contexts, making the project more inclusive for everyone.

Even if you prefer working with words over visuals, there's a place for you in open source design. **Documentation Design** involves improving the presentation and usability of project documentation, helping users and new contributors understand and use the software more effectively.

Most designers work across several of these areas, and other contributors typically help out as well. There is also a good chance that you can help shape the design process in the project as you become a regular contributor.

::resources
- [Bitcoin UX Research Toolkit](https://bitcoinresearch.xyz)
- [Bitcoin UI Kit](https://www.bitcoinuikit.com)
- [Conducting research](https://bitcoin.design/guide/designing-products/user-research/) in the Bitcoin Design Guide
- [Accessibility](https://bitcoin.design/guide/designing-products/accessibility/) in the Bitcoin Design Guide
- [Simple Documentation](https://docs.simple.org)
- [Bitcoin Core App Design documentation](https://bitcoincore.app)
::

## The Importance of Design

The impact of good design on open source projects cannot be overstated. Well-designed software that is truly built for real people is more likely to be adopted and used regularly. When software is more intuitive and enjoyable to use, we are more likely to stick with it and recommend it to others. **Increased adoption** can lead to a snowball effect, attracting more users and potentially more contributors to the project.

Speaking of contributors, attractive and user-friendly projects tend to draw more people who want to get involved. This **growth in the community** can lead to faster development, more diverse perspectives, and ultimately, better software.

Good design also helps open source alternatives compete more effectively with proprietary software. In many cases, open source software may have similar or even superior functionality compared to proprietary alternatives. However, if the open source option is difficult to use, many people will stick with the more polished proprietary product. By improving the design of open source software, you can help level the playing field and **give users a genuine choice**.

Design improvements can also make complex functionality more accessible to users. Many open source projects are incredibly powerful but can be overwhelming for new users. Your design skills can help bridge this gap, making advanced features **more discoverable and easier to use** and giving users new super powers.

Lastly, consistent and thoughtful design helps **create a strong, recognizable brand** for the project. This can help the project stand out in a crowded field, strengthen the community, and build user trust and loyalty over time.

## Success Stories

Designers have made significant impacts in the open source world. Their stories can serve as inspiration and show the real difference design can make in these projects.

### [WalletScrutiny](https://bitcoin.design/guide/case-studies/walletscrutiny/)

This design effort is an excellent example of how design can significantly improve the usability and impact of an open source project. The project, which evaluates the security and reproducibility of bitcoin wallets, underwent a comprehensive redesign process with the help of the Bitcoin Design Community.

The redesign focused on improving the website's usability, visual appeal, and information architecture. Key improvements included:

- A new brand identity with a more professional and trustworthy feel
- A redesigned homepage with a clear call-to-action and easy-to-use search function
- Improved navigation and restructuring of the methodology page for better readability
- Enhanced copywriting to make technical concepts more accessible to users

User testing before and after the redesign showed significant improvements in user understanding and navigation of the site. The new design made it easier for different user groups - from everyday bitcoin users to security experts - to find the information they needed.
This collaboration demonstrates how open source design can transform a technically complex project into a more user-friendly and impactful resource, potentially improving wallet security across the bitcoin ecosystem.

::editors-note
###### Request for content
We would like to showcase more examples of how designers helped make improvements. [More here](https://github.com/GBKS/opendesign.guide/issues/3).
::

These success stories show that designers can have a profound impact on open source projects. Whether it's making complex technology more accessible, improving project branding, or enhancing user experiences, designers play a crucial role in the ecosystem.

## Best Practices

Open source collaboration is a unique way of collaboration, and there are several best practices that can help you contribute effectively and make the most of your experience.

First and foremost, take the time to **understand the project thoroughly**. Familiarize yourself with its goals, target audience, and any technical constraints. Use the software yourself and document your experience. Join the community, and see what is being discussed. This knowledge will help you create designs that truly serve the project's needs and are feasible to implement [C3](/3-getting-started#understanding-project-structures){:class='chapter-link'}.

When you're just starting out, it's often best to **begin with minor contributions**. This approach allows you to understand the project's workflow and community dynamics without feeling overwhelmed. As you gain confidence and familiarity with the project, you can gradually take on larger design tasks.

**Clear communication** is key in open source projects. You are designing for a community, including end-users, developers, maintainers, and others. So when you propose designs, explain your decisions clearly. What problem are you trying to solve? Why did you choose this particular solution? Being transparent about your thought process helps others understand and provide constructive feedback on your work. This will help improve your work and make sure it aligns with everyone around you.

**Patience** is another crucial virtue in the open source world. Every project consists of a unique group of individuals, and how they interact defines the rhythm at which everything moves. Some projects move fast, while others take more time for decisions because their contributors are volunteers and need to communicate across time zones and different languages. When you work with this rhythm, you are more likely to have a positive experience and successful contributions.

While you don't need to become a programming expert, having a **basic understanding of version control** [C4](/4-collaborative-workflows){:class='chapter-link'} can be incredibly helpful. It is a very effective way of allowing anyone to contribute to a project by proposing changes and having them discussed and approved by the community. This knowledge will allow you to contribute more effectively and collaborate more smoothly with others.

Remember that design in open source is **a collaborative effort** [C5](/5-design-process){:class='chapter-link'}. Work closely with developers to ensure your designs are technically feasible. Prepare prototypes for your designs and validate them with users. Be open to feedback and willing to iterate on your designs based on community input.

Lastly, always **document your work thoroughly**. It helps others understand and build upon your contributions, ensuring that your designs can evolve and improve even if you move on to other projects. Design documentation is also a great learning resource for new contributors, and it helps reduce repeat questions.

While this may sound like a lot of work, the good news is that you have a lot of freedom to shape your involvement. You can find the right pace that works best for you and the others you work with.

## Conclusion

Designers play a vital role in open source projects, making powerful software more accessible and appealing to users. Their contributions span from user research and interface design to creating cohesive design systems and ensuring accessibility.

In the open source world, designers are problem solvers, user advocates, and community builders. They work in a unique environment that requires adaptability, clear communication, and close collaboration with developers and users.

Now let's get you started in [C3](/3-getting-started){:class='chapter-link'}.

Commit message:

Chapter 2 revision based on reading session (#18)
* Revision of chapter 2 based on reading session

Trying to address some of the feedback we came up with. I have to come back to this one and iterate a little further.

I stayed away from the success stories, as I think this is a separate and larger mini-project to tackle. It requires research and digging up those great examples and goes beyond copy revision.

This also introduces a new type of link - a chapter link. It has a distinct look from external links, so readers can easily identify internal cross-references. Curious to hear what others think of it.

* Minor link tweaks

* Minor copy revision

* Copy and success story tweaks

Initially I thought I'd leave the AI-generated success stories in, but I took them out now. I added the WalletScrutiny case study from the Bitcoin Design Guide, as well as a new component that can be used for editor's notes. It is used in the page to show a request for content. Hopefully we get some contributions with additional case studies.

* Custom component code improvements and link re-org

- Found the proper way to do components, so restructured them.
- Combined links into a "Resources" component that can be inserted at the bottom of each paragraph. It's collapsed by default.

* Link style tweak

* Tweaking the last sentence per feedback

content/2-the-designers-role.md, after:

---
title: Understanding the designer's role
chapter: Chapter 2
colors:
  base: '#FDC3AF'
  accentOne: '#F2734F'
  accentTwo: '#2A5EA7'
  card: 'white'
thumbnail:
  - designers-role-thumb.jpg
  - designers-role-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - designers-role-thumb-back.png
  - designers-role-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - designers-role-thumb-mid.png
  - designers-role-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - designers-role-thumb-front.png
  - designers-role-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - designers-role.jpg
  - designers-role@2x.jpg
---

# Understanding the Designer's Role

## The Evolving Role of Design

In the early days of open source [C1](/1-open-source){:class='chapter-link'}, the focus was primarily on functionality. Developers were more concerned with creating powerful software that could perform complex tasks, often with little emphasis on user-friendliness. The result was software that, while impressive in its capabilities, could be challenging for the average user to navigate and use effectively.

Today, design plays a crucial role in the success and adoption of open source projects. The community has recognized that even the most powerful software is of limited use if people find it difficult or frustrating to use. There is now a growing emphasis on creating intuitive, visually appealing interfaces and smooth user experiences.

This shift has opened up exciting opportunities for designers to make significant contributions. Your skills are now more valuable than ever, and you have the power to shape how millions of people interact with technology.

## Types of Design Contributions

As a designer, you might be wondering exactly how you can contribute to open source projects. The good news is that there are many ways to get involved, each utilizing different aspects of your design expertise.

**User Research** [C8](/8-improving-ux/#conducting-user-research){:class='chapter-link'} is essential for understanding the role a project plays in users lives. Listening to the community and speaking with users about their needs, behaviors, and pain points helps inform design decisions and ensure that the software meets real user needs. A unique aspect of open-source user research is that you are part of the community and in direct contact with users and contributors all the time.

**User Interface (UI) Design** is perhaps the most visible form of contribution. This involves creating visually appealing and intuitive interfaces for applications. Your work here can transform a powerful but intimidating piece of software into something that users find inviting and easy to use.

Closely related to UI Design is **User Experience (UX) Design**. While UI focuses on the look of the interface, UX is concerned with the overall user journey. As a UX designer, you'll consider new, regular, and experienced users across their many activities, and make sure that every interaction is consistent, smooth and intuitive.

If you have a knack for creating eye-catching visuals, you might focus on **Graphic Design**. This could involve developing logos and websites that capture the essence of a project, designing icons that clearly communicate their function, or creating other visual assets that enhance the software's appeal. Swag and conference materials are also often in high demand.

For those who enjoy organizing information, **Information Architecture** offers a vital role. This involves structuring the content within an application in a way that makes sense to users, helping them find what they need quickly and easily.

**Interaction Design** is another crucial area. Here, you'll focus on designing how users interact with the software's features, ensuring that every button press, swipe, or click feels natural and satisfying.

In larger projects, you might contribute to **Design Systems**. This involves creating and maintaining consistent design languages that can be applied across all aspects of a project, ensuring a cohesive look and feel.

**Accessibility Design** is important for letting users adjust software to their needs and wants. Your role is to ensure that the technology is usable by people with various abilities and across many different contexts, making the project more inclusive for everyone.

Even if you prefer working with words over visuals, there's a place for you in open source design. **Documentation Design** involves improving the presentation and usability of project documentation, helping users and new contributors understand and use the software more effectively.

Most designers work across several of these areas, and other contributors typically help out as well. There is also a good chance that you can help shape the design process in the project as you become a regular contributor.

::resources
- [Bitcoin UX Research Toolkit](https://bitcoinresearch.xyz)
- [Bitcoin UI Kit](https://www.bitcoinuikit.com)
- [Conducting research](https://bitcoin.design/guide/designing-products/user-research/) in the Bitcoin Design Guide
- [Accessibility](https://bitcoin.design/guide/designing-products/accessibility/) in the Bitcoin Design Guide
- [Simple Documentation](https://docs.simple.org)
- [Bitcoin Core App Design documentation](https://bitcoincore.app)
::

## The Importance of Design

The impact of good design on open source projects cannot be overstated. Well-designed software that is truly built for real people is more likely to be adopted and used regularly. When software is more intuitive and enjoyable to use, we are more likely to stick with it and recommend it to others. **Increased adoption** can lead to a snowball effect, attracting more users and potentially more contributors to the project.

Speaking of contributors, attractive and user-friendly projects tend to draw more people who want to get involved. This **growth in the community** can lead to faster development, more diverse perspectives, and ultimately, better software.

Good design also helps open source alternatives compete more effectively with proprietary software. In many cases, open source software may have similar or even superior functionality compared to proprietary alternatives. However, if the open source option is difficult to use, many people will stick with the more polished proprietary product. By improving the design of open source software, you can help level the playing field and **give users a genuine choice**.

Design improvements can also make complex functionality more accessible to users. Many open source projects are incredibly powerful but can be overwhelming for new users. Your design skills can help bridge this gap, making advanced features **more discoverable and easier to use** and giving users new super powers.

Lastly, consistent and thoughtful design helps **create a strong, recognizable brand** for the project. This can help the project stand out in a crowded field, strengthen the community, and build user trust and loyalty over time.

## Success Stories

Designers have made significant impacts in the open source world. Their stories can serve as inspiration and show the real difference design can make in these projects.

### [WalletScrutiny](https://bitcoin.design/guide/case-studies/walletscrutiny/)

This design effort is an excellent example of how design can significantly improve the usability and impact of an open source project. The project, which evaluates the security and reproducibility of bitcoin wallets, underwent a comprehensive redesign process with the help of the Bitcoin Design Community.

The redesign focused on improving the website's usability, visual appeal, and information architecture. Key improvements included:

- A new brand identity with a more professional and trustworthy feel
- A redesigned homepage with a clear call-to-action and easy-to-use search function
- Improved navigation and restructuring of the methodology page for better readability
- Enhanced copywriting to make technical concepts more accessible to users

User testing before and after the redesign showed significant improvements in user understanding and navigation of the site. The new design made it easier for different user groups - from everyday bitcoin users to security experts - to find the information they needed.
This collaboration demonstrates how open source design can transform a technically complex project into a more user-friendly and impactful resource, potentially improving wallet security across the bitcoin ecosystem.

::editors-note
###### Request for content
We would like to showcase more examples of how designers helped make improvements. [More here](https://github.com/GBKS/opendesign.guide/issues/3).
::

These success stories show that designers can have a profound impact on open source projects. Whether it's making complex technology more accessible, improving project branding, or enhancing user experiences, designers play a crucial role in the ecosystem.

## Best Practices

Open source collaboration is a unique way of collaboration, and there are several best practices that can help you contribute effectively and make the most of your experience.

First and foremost, take the time to **understand the project thoroughly**. Familiarize yourself with its goals, target audience, and any technical constraints. Use the software yourself and document your experience. Join the community, and see what is being discussed. This knowledge will help you create designs that truly serve the project's needs and are feasible to implement [C3](/3-getting-started#understanding-project-structures){:class='chapter-link'}.

When you're just starting out, it's often best to **begin with minor contributions**. This approach allows you to understand the project's workflow and community dynamics without feeling overwhelmed. As you gain confidence and familiarity with the project, you can gradually take on larger design tasks.

**Clear communication** is key in open source projects. You are designing for a community, including end-users, developers, maintainers, and others. So when you propose designs, explain your decisions clearly. What problem are you trying to solve? Why did you choose this particular solution? Being transparent about your thought process helps others understand and provide constructive feedback on your work. This will help improve your work and make sure it aligns with everyone around you.

**Patience** is another crucial virtue in the open source world. Every project consists of a unique group of individuals, and how they interact defines the rhythm at which everything moves. Some projects move fast, while others take more time for decisions because their contributors are volunteers and need to communicate across time zones and different languages. When you work with this rhythm, you are more likely to have a positive experience and successful contributions.

While you don't need to become a programming expert, having a **basic understanding of version control** [C4](/4-collaborative-workflows){:class='chapter-link'} can be incredibly helpful. It is a very effective way of allowing anyone to contribute to a project by proposing changes and having them discussed and approved by the community. This knowledge will allow you to contribute more effectively and collaborate more smoothly with others.

Remember that design in open source is **a collaborative effort** [C5](/5-design-process){:class='chapter-link'}. Work closely with developers to ensure your designs are technically feasible. Prepare prototypes for your designs and validate them with users. Be open to feedback and willing to iterate on your designs based on community input.

Lastly, always **document your work thoroughly**. It helps others understand and build upon your contributions, ensuring that your designs can evolve and improve even if you move on to other projects. Design documentation is also a great learning resource for new contributors, and it helps reduce repeat questions.

While this may sound like a lot of work, the good news is that you have a lot of freedom to shape your involvement. You can find the right pace that works best for you and the others you work with.

## Conclusion

Designers play a vital role in open source projects, making powerful software more accessible and appealing to users. Their contributions span from user research and interface design to creating cohesive design systems and ensuring accessibility.

In the open source world, designers are problem solvers, user advocates, and community builders. They work in a unique environment that requires adaptability, clear communication, and close collaboration with developers and users.

If this seems like a lot, no worries. Everyone starts small and can choose how many things they want to take on. [Chapter 3](/3-getting-started){:class='chapter-link'} is about taking your first steps.
