content/6-design-tools.md, before:

---
title: Tools and Resources
chapter: Chapter 6
description: Explore essential design tools for open source contribution. From vector graphics to prototyping, find the right tools to create impactful designs in collaborative projects.
colors:
  base: '#FEE6E4'
  accentOne: '#ADE3F5'
  accentTwo: '#FFA8AD'
  card: '#233F68'
thumbnail:
  - tools-thumb.jpg
  - tools-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - tools-thumb-back.png
  - tools-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - tools-thumb-mid.png
  - tools-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - tools-thumb-front.png
  - tools-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - tools.jpg
  - tools@2x.jpg
preview: tools-preview.jpg
---

# Tools and Resources

## Introduction to Open Source Design Tools

When starting your journey in open source design, you'll find there's a wide variety of tools available to help you create and collaborate. While many designers are familiar with commercial tools like Adobe Creative Suite and Sketch, the open source community also offers powerful alternatives that align with its values.

A great benefit of using open-source tools is that they are designed for an accessible and community-led style of collaboration. Other contributors are not locked out because they can't afford your favorite commercial tool, or a proprietary file type is used. In addition, you can help improve the open-source tools you adopt by giving valuable feedback.

It's important to note that you can absolutely use commercial tools for open source contributions. The key is choosing tools that work well for you and your project's needs. What matters most is your ability to collaborate effectively and create designs that benefit the project.

## Essential Design Tools

### Interface Design

**[Penpot](https://penpot.app/){:target="_blank"}** is a powerful open source design and prototyping platform that's gaining rapid adoption, especially in the open source community. It's designed to bridge the gap between designers and developers.

- Browser-based design and prototyping tool
- Real-time collaboration features
- Browser-based with self-hosting option
- Growing community and feature set
- Self-hosting option

**[Figma](https://www.figma.com/){:target="_blank"}** is a widely-used commercial alternative that offers powerful features for UI design, prototyping, and team collaboration. As a browser-based tool with a desktop app option, it makes it easy to create, share, and iterate on designs with teams of any size. While not open source, its free tier is generous enough for many open source projects.

- Real-time collaboration features
- Extensive component libraries
- Great for UI design and prototyping
- Built-in developer handoff features
- Also includes FigJam for collaborative brainstorming

### Vector Design

**[Inkscape](https://inkscape.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a powerful tool for creating and editing vector graphics. Vector graphics are images that can be scaled to any size without losing quality - perfect for logos, icons, and illustrations.

Key features:
- Create scalable graphics for any screen size
- Support for [SVG](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics){:target="_blank"} (Scalable Vector Graphics, an open standard for vector graphics)
- Extensive set of shape and path tools
- Python scripting support for automating repetitive tasks
- Active community with lots of tutorials and resources

### Image Editing

**[GIMP](https://www.gimp.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a versatile tool for working with images. Whether you're creating web graphics, editing photos, or designing user interface elements, GIMP provides the features you need.

Key features:
- Comprehensive image editing capabilities
- Support for layers and masks
- Wide range of filters and effects
- Plugin system for extending functionality
- Cross-platform compatibility

**[Krita](https://krita.org/){:target="_blank"}** is another powerful open source tool, particularly beloved by digital artists and illustrators. While GIMP excels at photo editing and general image manipulation, Krita shines in digital painting and illustration.

Key features:
- Extensive brush engine with customizable brushes
- Support for drawing tablets with pressure sensitivity
- Animation tools
- Built-in vector tools
- Resource management for brushes, patterns, and gradients

### 3D Design

**[Blender](https://www.blender.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a comprehensive 3D creation suite that's particularly useful if your project needs 3D graphics, animations, or visualizations. While not every project requires 3D elements, Blender can be invaluable for:

- Creating 3D icons or illustrations
- Developing game assets
- Making product visualizations
- Creating animations for tutorials or presentations
- Rendering realistic mockups

## UX Research Tools

User research is crucial for creating effective designs. Here are some helpful tools for gathering and analyzing user feedback:

- [Miro](https://miro.com/){:target="_blank"}: Collaborative whiteboarding for user journey mapping and workshop activities
- [LimeSurvey](https://www.limesurvey.org/){:target="_blank"}: Create detailed surveys and questionnaires
- [Google Forms](https://forms.google.com/){:target="_blank"}: Quick and easy survey creation
- [Notion](https://www.notion.so/){:target="_blank"}: Organize research findings and collaborate with team members
- [Nextcloud](https://nextcloud.com/){:target="_blank"}: Self-hosted solution for storing and sharing research data

## Design Systems and Libraries

### Design System Tools

Design systems help maintain consistency across a project. Here are tools that can help you create and manage design systems:

- [Zeroheight](https://zeroheight.com/){:target="_blank"}: Create living documentation for your design system
- [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/){:target="_blank"}: Document and test UI components
- [Pattern Lab](https://patternlab.io/){:target="_blank"}: Build atomic design systems

### Pattern Libraries

Pattern libraries are collections of reusable design components. Some popular open source pattern libraries include:

- [Material Design](https://material.io/){:target="_blank"}
- [Carbon Design System](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/){:target="_blank"}
- [Ant Design](https://ant.design/){:target="_blank"}
- [Bitcoin UI Kit](https://www.bitcoinuikit.com/){:target="_blank"}

### Illustrations and Icons

Ready-to-use visual elements that can enhance your project's design:

- [Open Peeps](https://www.openpeeps.com/){:target="_blank"}
- [Health Icons](https://healthicons.org){:target="_blank"}
- [Bitcoin Icons](https://bitcoinicons.com/){:target="_blank"}

## Accessibility Tools

Accessibility isn't just a feature - it's a fundamental aspect of good design that should be considered from the start of any project. This is especially important in open source, where our work should be usable by everyone, regardless of their abilities.

Helpful accessibility tools include:

- [WAVE](https://wave.webaim.org/){:target="_blank"}: Evaluate web content for accessibility issues
- [Contrast Checker](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/){:target="_blank"}: Ensure your color choices meet accessibility standards
- [Axe](https://www.deque.com/axe/){:target="_blank"}: Automated accessibility testing
- [The A11Y Project](https://www.a11yproject.com/){:target="_blank"}: Resources and tutorials for learning about accessibility

Remember that accessibility is especially crucial in open source projects, as it aligns with the core values of inclusivity and collaboration. Even developer tools and terminal-based applications should be designed with accessibility in mind.

## Project Management and Communication

- [Miro](https://miro.com/){:target="_blank"}: Digital whiteboard for visual collaboration
- [Jira](https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira){:target="_blank"}: Project tracking and management
- [Discord](https://discord.com/){:target="_blank"}: Real-time chat and community building
- [Matrix](https://matrix.org/){:target="_blank"}: Decentralized communication platform
- [CryptPad](https://cryptpad.fr/){:target="_blank"}: Privacy-focused collaboration platform

## Conclusion

The tools you choose should support your workflow and help you collaborate effectively with others. Don't feel limited to using only open source tools - use what works best for you and your project. The most important thing is your ability to contribute meaningful designs that improve the user experience of open source software.

Remember that tools are just that - tools. They're meant to help you bring your ideas to life and collaborate with others. Focus on learning the tools that will help you achieve your goals and contribute effectively to the projects you care about.

As you become more involved in open source design, you'll discover which tools work best for your workflow. Don't be afraid to experiment with different options and ask other designers in the community about their experiences and recommendations.

Commit message:

Added tools recommended by Eriol
See this comment: https://github.com/GBKS/opendesign.guide/pull/25#discussion_r1846158169

content/6-design-tools.md, after:

---
title: Tools and Resources
chapter: Chapter 6
description: Explore essential design tools for open source contribution. From vector graphics to prototyping, find the right tools to create impactful designs in collaborative projects.
colors:
  base: '#FEE6E4'
  accentOne: '#ADE3F5'
  accentTwo: '#FFA8AD'
  card: '#233F68'
thumbnail:
  - tools-thumb.jpg
  - tools-thumb@2x.jpg
thumbnail_back:
  - tools-thumb-back.png
  - tools-thumb-back@2x.png
thumbnail_mid:
  - tools-thumb-mid.png
  - tools-thumb-mid@2x.png
thumbnail_front:
  - tools-thumb-front.png
  - tools-thumb-front@2x.png
images:
  - tools.jpg
  - tools@2x.jpg
preview: tools-preview.jpg
---

# Tools and Resources

## Introduction to Open Source Design Tools

When starting your journey in open source design, you'll find there's a wide variety of tools available to help you create and collaborate. While many designers are familiar with commercial tools like Adobe Creative Suite and Sketch, the open source community also offers powerful alternatives that align with its values.

A great benefit of using open-source tools is that they are designed for an accessible and community-led style of collaboration. Other contributors are not locked out because they can't afford your favorite commercial tool, or a proprietary file type is used. In addition, you can help improve the open-source tools you adopt by giving valuable feedback.

It's important to note that you can absolutely use commercial tools for open source contributions. The key is choosing tools that work well for you and your project's needs. What matters most is your ability to collaborate effectively and create designs that benefit the project.

## Essential Design Tools

### Interface Design

**[Penpot](https://penpot.app/){:target="_blank"}** is a powerful open source design and prototyping platform that's gaining rapid adoption, especially in the open source community. It's designed to bridge the gap between designers and developers.

- Browser-based design and prototyping tool
- Real-time collaboration features
- Browser-based with self-hosting option
- Growing community and feature set
- Self-hosting option

**[Figma](https://www.figma.com/){:target="_blank"}** is a widely-used commercial alternative that offers powerful features for UI design, prototyping, and team collaboration. As a browser-based tool with a desktop app option, it makes it easy to create, share, and iterate on designs with teams of any size. While not open source, its free tier is generous enough for many open source projects.

- Real-time collaboration features
- Extensive component libraries
- Great for UI design and prototyping
- Built-in developer handoff features
- Also includes FigJam for collaborative brainstorming

### Vector Design

**[Inkscape](https://inkscape.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a powerful tool for creating and editing vector graphics. Vector graphics are images that can be scaled to any size without losing quality - perfect for logos, icons, and illustrations.

Key features:
- Create scalable graphics for any screen size
- Support for [SVG](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scalable_Vector_Graphics){:target="_blank"} (Scalable Vector Graphics, an open standard for vector graphics)
- Extensive set of shape and path tools
- Python scripting support for automating repetitive tasks
- Active community with lots of tutorials and resources

### Image Editing

**[GIMP](https://www.gimp.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a versatile tool for working with images. Whether you're creating web graphics, editing photos, or designing user interface elements, GIMP provides the features you need.

Key features:
- Comprehensive image editing capabilities
- Support for layers and masks
- Wide range of filters and effects
- Plugin system for extending functionality
- Cross-platform compatibility

**[Krita](https://krita.org/){:target="_blank"}** is another powerful open source tool, particularly beloved by digital artists and illustrators. While GIMP excels at photo editing and general image manipulation, Krita shines in digital painting and illustration.

Key features:
- Extensive brush engine with customizable brushes
- Support for drawing tablets with pressure sensitivity
- Animation tools
- Built-in vector tools
- Resource management for brushes, patterns, and gradients

### 3D Design

**[Blender](https://www.blender.org/){:target="_blank"}** is a comprehensive 3D creation suite that's particularly useful if your project needs 3D graphics, animations, or visualizations. While not every project requires 3D elements, Blender can be invaluable for:

- Creating 3D icons or illustrations
- Developing game assets
- Making product visualizations
- Creating animations for tutorials or presentations
- Rendering realistic mockups

## UX Research Tools

User research is crucial for creating effective designs. Here are some helpful tools for gathering and analyzing user feedback:

- [Miro](https://miro.com/){:target="_blank"}: Collaborative whiteboarding for user journey mapping and workshop activities
- [LimeSurvey](https://www.limesurvey.org/){:target="_blank"}: Create detailed surveys and questionnaires
- [Google Forms](https://forms.google.com/){:target="_blank"}: Quick and easy survey creation
- [Notion](https://www.notion.so/){:target="_blank"}: Organize research findings and collaborate with team members
- [Nextcloud](https://nextcloud.com/){:target="_blank"}: Self-hosted solution for storing and sharing research data

## Design Systems and Libraries

### Design System Tools

Design systems help maintain consistency across a project. Here are tools that can help you create and manage design systems:

- [Zeroheight](https://zeroheight.com/){:target="_blank"}: Create living documentation for your design system
- [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/){:target="_blank"}: Document and test UI components
- [Pattern Lab](https://patternlab.io/){:target="_blank"}: Build atomic design systems

### Pattern Libraries

Pattern libraries are collections of reusable design components. Some popular open source pattern libraries include:

- [Material Design](https://material.io/){:target="_blank"}
- [Carbon Design System](https://www.carbondesignsystem.com/){:target="_blank"}
- [Ant Design](https://ant.design/){:target="_blank"}
- [Bitcoin UI Kit](https://www.bitcoinuikit.com/){:target="_blank"}

### Illustrations and Icons

Ready-to-use visual elements that can enhance your project's design:

- [Open Peeps](https://www.openpeeps.com/){:target="_blank"}
- [Health Icons](https://healthicons.org){:target="_blank"}
- [Bitcoin Icons](https://bitcoinicons.com/){:target="_blank"}

## Accessibility Tools

Accessibility isn't just a feature - it's a fundamental aspect of good design that should be considered from the start of any project. This is especially important in open source, where our work should be usable by everyone, regardless of their abilities.

Helpful accessibility tools include:

- [WAVE](https://wave.webaim.org/){:target="_blank"}: Evaluate web content for accessibility issues
- [Contrast Checker](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/){:target="_blank"}: Ensure your color choices meet accessibility standards
- [Axe](https://www.deque.com/axe/){:target="_blank"}: Automated accessibility testing
- [The A11Y Project](https://www.a11yproject.com/){:target="_blank"}: Resources and tutorials for learning about accessibility

Remember that accessibility is especially crucial in open source projects, as it aligns with the core values of inclusivity and collaboration. Even developer tools and terminal-based applications should be designed with accessibility in mind.

## Project Management and Communication

- [Miro](https://miro.com/){:target="_blank"}: Digital whiteboard for visual collaboration
- [Jira](https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira){:target="_blank"}: Project tracking and management
- [Discord](https://discord.com/){:target="_blank"}: Real-time chat and community building
- [Matrix](https://matrix.org/){:target="_blank"}: Decentralized communication platform
- [CryptPad](https://cryptpad.fr/){:target="_blank"}: Privacy-focused collaboration platform
- [Excalidraw](https://app.excalidraw.com/){:target="_blank"}: A whiteboard collaboration tools for note-taking, planning etc
- [Taiga](https://taiga.pm/){:target="_blank"}: Kanban-style to-do lists and boards for project management

## Conclusion

The tools you choose should support your workflow and help you collaborate effectively with others. Don't feel limited to using only open source tools - use what works best for you and your project. The most important thing is your ability to contribute meaningful designs that improve the user experience of open source software.

Remember that tools are just that - tools. They're meant to help you bring your ideas to life and collaborate with others. Focus on learning the tools that will help you achieve your goals and contribute effectively to the projects you care about.

As you become more involved in open source design, you'll discover which tools work best for your workflow. Don't be afraid to experiment with different options and ask other designers in the community about their experiences and recommendations.
